In this video you will learn about matrix multiplication and spoiler alert.
Matrix multiplication is literally just the dot product, which itself is literally just a linear weighted
combination.
The idea of matrix multiplication is to calculate the dot product on lots of pairs of vectors all at
once, without having to write lots of for loops or lots of lines of code.
So matrix multiplication is really just an organized collection of dot products.
Let me begin by just discussing matrix sizes.
So matrices are organized into rows and columns and rows go down the y axis.
If we're thinking about this on a plot and columns go across the x axis.
Now when we are describing the sizes of matrices.
Then we would describe this as a four by three matrix, because there are four rows and three columns.
And we describe this as a three by seven matrix because there are three rows and seven columns.
So you always list first the number of rows and then the number of columns.
So the standard term for this kind of a organization of numbers is a matrix.
In the parlance of tensors and also PyTorch we would call this a two dimensional tensor.
It's two dimensions because there's just rows and columns.
There's no thickness to this.
So two dimensional tensors are the same thing as matrices.
And we always refer to their sizes as rows by columns.
And why am I telling you this?
Because there are rules for the validity of matrix multiplication, just like when I introduced the
dot product in the previous video, I said that the dot product is only defined between two vectors
that have the same length, so the same number of numbers in them.
So for matrix multiplication, you can only multiply two matrices if the inner dimensions here are the
same number if the inner dimensions match.
So here we have a matrix with m rows and n columns.
And here I have a tall matrix with n rows and k columns.
Now in this case these two dimensions are the same.
So n equals n and so that means that we can calculate the multiplication of these two matrices here.
And the size of the product matrix is determined by the outer dimensions here.
So m by k.
So that's going to be the result of this product matrix over here.
So here are some examples.
Imagine a and b are two matrices.
A is five by two.
So five rows and two columns.
B is two by seven.
So two rows and seven columns.
And the question is can we calculate the multiplication of these two matrices.
And the answer is yes because their inner dimensions match.
And the result of or the size of the product matrix will be five by seven.
Here's another example.
Now these two matrices, which are actually they can be the same as these two.
You can see the sizes are the same.
But when we turn them around and try to multiply B times a.
Now this is no longer a valid multiplication.
It's no longer a valid operation because the inner dimensions here do not match.
Seven and five are not the same number.
So we cannot multiply these two matrices in this order, even though we could multiply them in this
order.
Here's another example.
Imagine we have matrix C and A, and if we want to multiply these two matrices, we cannot multiply
them because the number of columns does not equal the number of rows in A.
But we can apply the transpose operation.
You'll remember that I introduced the transpose operation in the previous section when I was discussing
vectors and matrices in NumPy and PyTorch, and the idea of the transpose operation is to swap the rows
and the columns, and when you swap the rows and the columns, you're also going to swap these sizes.
So if we were to transpose C then that would actually transform this into a seven by five matrix.
And then C transpose.
And we have five columns that actually would work here.
So we can actually calculate the matrix multiplication between C transpose and A.
Although the multiplication between C and A is not defined okay, so that's the rules for matrix multiplication.
And with this in mind, we can actually revisit the discussion of the dot product and see how matrix
multiplication is related to the dot product.
And let's you see on this slide.
So imagine we have two vectors v and w.
Maybe this is activations from some neurons.
And these are the weights for those neurons to come into the current neuron.
And if those are five elements we can think about these two vectors as being like matrices where one
of the dimensions is one.
So a five by one matrix is the same thing as a column vector.
Now we cannot multiply these two matrices or vectors because the inner dimensions here do not match.
But we can transpose V, and that swaps the rows and the columns.
And now this becomes a one by five vector or matrix.
And now we actually can calculate the product between these two vectors.
And the result is of the size corresponding to the outer dimensions here which is one by one.
So that's going to give us a scalar or just one number.
Okay.
So this shows the relationship between matrix multiplication and the dot product.
And this also leads to the definition of matrix multiplication.
So matrix multiplication is or can be conceptualized as an ordered structure of dot products.
Okay so here I have two matrices.
These are numbers.
These are letters.
That's just to make it convenient to see how they relate to each other.
What I'm showing here is going to be the result of matrix multiplication.
So we can multiply these two matrices.
And the result is also going to be a two by two matrix.
And what are the elements in that two by two matrix.
Well we take the rows of the left matrix and the columns of the right matrix.
And we calculate their dot product.
So the element the value of the element in this position here in the resulting matrix is zero times
a plus one times c.
So that is the dot product between the first row of the left matrix and the first column of the right
matrix.
So that's this element.
And I think you can see where this is going.
We get this element over here which is in the second row.
And the first column as the dot product between the second row of the left matrix and the first column
of the right matrix, and then and so on.
So here again we have the element in the second first row and the second column.
And that's the dot product between the first row and the second column and so on for all of the elements
in the matrix.
So you can see that matrix multiplication is just a bunch of dot products that are organized into a
compact form.
So now I'm going to switch to Python.
And I will demonstrate basically several features of dot products and matrix multiplication.
We're going to create vectors in numpy.
We're going to combine them and show that their dot products can be implemented as matrix multiplication.
You will see different ways of coding matrix multiplication in Python, in NumPy, and also in PyTorch.
And yet again, just like in the previous video, you will see that some PyTorch functions are very
sensitive to the data type, in particular trying to work with ints and floats.
So here we are with the code for matrix multiplication.
Import numpy and PyTorch.
Here what I'm doing is creating four vectors.
These are kind of simulating two activations vectors.
And these are simulating two weights vectors.
All you know arbitrary numbers.
There's no particular reason why I use these numbers and not any other numbers.
Why is this squared and not raised to the fourth power?
I don't know, it's kind of arbitrary, but what is not arbitrary?
What is really important here for these calculations is that the number of elements in all four of these
vectors is the same, so the sizes of these vectors all need to be the same.
But there are actual numerical values are not relevant for this discussion.
Okay, so here I am manually calculating their dot products between activation one and wait one and
activation vector two and weight vector two.
And that happens to be 0.5.
Now this is 0.49999999.
This is just tiny, tiny, tiny rounding errors that make this look like it's not 0.5, but it really
is 0.5.
And then here we have 116.9.
Okay.
Now we have four vectors here but only two results here.
And that's because I've only calculated the dot product between activation one and weight one.
But we can also calculate the.
I'm calling these cross terms here.
But basically the dot product between activation one and weight vector two.
And those results are 73 and minus two and a half.
Okay.
Very nice.
So what we are doing here is representing everything as individual vectors.
And we want for dot products.
So we have to write out four lines of code.
Now that's fine.
There's nothing wrong with that.
But it doesn't really scale up to a very, very, very large number of vectors and dot products that
we need to calculate in these large language models.
Okay.
So therefore what I'm doing here is combining these vectors or concatenating these vectors into matrices.
So in both of these cases these are two by five matrices.
You can see that there's two rows and five columns.
And also similar to what you saw in the previous video the weights are floating point numbers and the
activations are integers.
By the way, that is not generally the case.
The activations vectors in real models are also floating point numbers.
I'm only making them integers here to highlight one of the Difficulties or potential points of confusion
when working with PyTorch.
Okay, so now there are matrices and now we can multiply them using matrix multiplication.
Now the sizes of these matrices are x dot shape and weights dot shape.
These are two by five and two by five matrices.
And that means that we cannot calculate the matrix multiplication between these two matrices because
their inner dimensions do not match.
So instead, what we are going to do is transpose the weights, and that gives us a two by five matrix
and a five by two matrix.
And now we actually can multiply the two matrices because their inner dimensions match, and the product
matrix, or the size of the product matrix will correspond to the outer dimensions, which is two by
two.
And now the question is what will be the elements in that two by two matrix?
I'm sure you've already guessed that they are going to be these dot products that I calculated manually
up here.
So let's try this now in Python we can implement matrix multiplication using the at symbol.
This is exactly the same symbol that you use in your email address okay so but now in Python we that
is used for matrix multiplication.
So the activations matrix times the transpose of the weight matrix.
And that gives us the first column is 0.5.
Actually let me show you the diagonals first.
So the diagonals are 0.5 and 116.
And that corresponds to these numbers here.
So the dot product between activation one and weight one and activation two and weight two.
Those are the elements in the diagonals.
And then the off diagonals are the cross terms.
So there we have 76 and -2.5.
And that corresponds to these numbers here which are the dot products between activation one and weight
two and activation two and weight one.
Okay.
So that is one notation for getting matrix multiplication in Python.
We can also use the numpy dot dot function.
Now this is I mentioned in the previous video that this is a little bit poorly named in my opinion,
because the dot product formally is not defined between two matrices.
If we're thinking about kind of a classical linear algebra environment, the dot product is not a valid
operation on matrices.
It doesn't make any sense.
We can calculate the dot product on vectors, but not on matrices.
But the Python numpy function numpy dot dot actually implements matrix multiplication, which, as you
now know, is just a sequence of of dot products on the rows of this matrix and the columns of weights
transpose, which are the rows of weights.
In previous videos I was using multiplication you implementing multiplication through the asterisk symbol.
And that is also defined for matrices.
But that is not matrix multiplication as I described it in the slides.
Instead, that is something else called Hadamard multiplication, which is also called element wise
multiplication.
It's a different operation on on matrices, and it's not implementing the dot product.
Instead it is just calculating element wise multiplication.
So we started off with these two matrices X and weights.
and these were five by two matrices.
And now the Hadamard multiplication is another five by two matrix.
We actually can get the dot products here by summing over the rows here.
So summing across the columns for each row.
But that doesn't give us the cross terms.
So this is actually not a good way to calculate dot products between two or all the vectors that are
stored into matrices.
I'm just showing it here so you know the difference.
In general, when you're using numpy you want to use the at symbol or numpy dot dot to implement matrix
multiplication.
Okay.
So potential source of confusion something to be mindful of.
So that was all in numpy.
And now let's switch to PyTorch.
For starters I'm going to transform this numpy array into a PyTorch tensor and same thing for the weights.
So this starts off as let me do this.
I'm going to print the type of x and that is a numpy array.
And then we're going to look at the type of x embedded inside this function torch.tensor.
And now it is no longer a numpy array.
It is a PyTorch tensor.
So different data type.
All the numerical values are exactly the same.
It's just that the data type is different.
Okay.
So now if we try to multiply exactly how we did before and what is going to happen, well, we see again
this error message that we saw in the previous video, uh, a runtime error.
They have to have the same data type but got long and double, which is the same thing as float.
You probably already guessed that this was going to happen by seeing this code that I commented out.
So in the previous video I created a new PyTorch tensor and there I use dtype equals float and so on.
Here I'm implementing this in a slightly different way.
So I'm writing I'm creating this tensor which is ints.
And then I'm writing dot two.
So a method called two.
And then I'm sending this to floating point numbers.
So 64 bit precision floating point numbers.
And now we actually can calculate the matrix multiplication.
And the results not surprisingly are exactly the same as we got before.
Except for the data type.
The data type is different.
Remember we didn't have a problem with this line over here when we used PyTorch.
So sorry numpy.
So numpy is more robust to data types than is PyTorch.
Here we can calculate matrix multiplication.
And again we're getting an error.
And what is the problem with this code here.
This is not the same as the error that I got over here right.
So here the error message was about the data type.
Here the error message is about the shapes.
And they cannot be multiplied.
And you already know why that is the case.
And you know what the solution is.
And you also see the solution here commented.
So.
So now we can run this.
We get another error.
And why do we get this error.
Well that's because I rerun this code.
So now that works.
And now this is going to work.
So torch dot matmul for matrix multiplication.
In the previous video we were using torch dot to calculate dot products.
You know that that works here.
Where was it here numpy Numpy.dot that gives us the matrix multiplication.
Here, let's see what happens.
Okay, so here we get an error message.
Now this is not an error message about data types or ints and floats.
This is a error message that PyTorch is expecting one dimensional tensors.
So vectors.
But we actually provided two dimensional tensors or matrices.
But when we run this code where I'm extracting just the first row of x and this is also the first row
of weights, then okay.
So now we're getting I think this is actually a typo.
This should be this is the numpy version.
This needs to be the PyTorch version.
And now finally we get a result of 0.5.
So what you can see from this video is that PyTorch and NumPy are different libraries.
They function differently.
They have different expectations for the sizes and the data types of inputs.
It's all quite tricky.
I do not recommend trying to memorize all of this stuff.
Uh, if you are mindful of these error messages and what they mean and how they arrive and how to resolve
them, you will basically just get more familiar with working with these libraries over time.
So that's it for this video.
You learned that matrix multiplication is just a fancy and compact way of sorting and organizing and
collecting a series of dot products between pairs of vectors that are organized into two matrices.
And in terms of coding, you saw that there are several ways to calculate matrix multiplication, and
also that PyTorch functions can be really sensitive to the data type.
So that's something to be mindful of as you proceed in PyTorch.